.TH WS 1

.SH NAME
ws \- The WaveScript interactive evaluator


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws
.I source-file.ws
[
.B \-t
]
[
.BI \-dump \ file
]
[
.BI \-n \ int
]
[
.BI \-O \ level
]
.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.BR ws (1)
command is the simplest entrypoint to the WaveScript system.
It will compile a WaveScript source program and execute it directly
within the Scheme environment that's hosting the WaveScript compiler.
The user may browse interactively through the resulting stream.  

.BR ws (1) 
is useful for debugging and quick execution (though 
.BR ws.early (1)
provides faster compile times).  For high performance or parallel
execution one
should use a different backend such as 
.BR wsc2 (1)
or 
.BR wsmlton (1).

.SH OPTIONS

The following command-line options are recognized by
.BR ws (1).

.TP
.BI \-dump \ file
Dump the output of the stream to a text file.

.TP
.B \-t
Time how long it takes to produce the number of tuples specified by
.BR \-n.

.TP
.BI \-n \ int
Produce a certain number of tuples non-interactively, and then exit.


.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

Note, these environment variables have "Regiment" in their titles
because the WaveScript system is built on top of the older Regiment
compiler.  Only 
REGIMENTD 
is required to have a value, other environment variables are optional.
.TP
.B REGIMENTD
The location of the WaveScript/Regiment installation.  Usually this is
.I /usr/lib/wavescript/0.9.0
where, for example, 0.9.0 is the version of the WaveScript installation.

The location of standard libraries is 
.IR $REGIMENTD/lib \.
.TP
.B REGIMENTHOST
  This is one of ikarus, plt, chez, or larceny.  Although larceny
  support may be limited.
.TP
.B REGDEBUGMODE
  When set to "ON", the WaveScript/Regiment compiler turns on all
  debugging checks.  Unfortunately, depending on REGIMENTHOST, the
  WaveScript compiler may need to be recompiled for changes to take
  effect.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ws.early (1),
.BR wsc2 (1),
.BR wsmlton (1),
.BR wstiny (1),
.BR wsjava (1)
.br
 The WaveScript user's manual - 
.I http://regiment.us/man

\" WAVESCOPED= /home/newton/v1
\" REGOPTLVL=
\" REGIMENT_OR_WAVESCRIPT=
\" REGTHREADS=
\" REGIMENTEXEC
